# Meeting: 28 July 2023

## Attendees

* Timo Kunkel
* Chris Needham
* Francois Daoust
* Pat Griffis
* Wolfgang Schildbach
* Sergio Garcia Murillo

# Minutes

## Introductions

PG: I'm active in numerous standards bodies, on the board of the UHD Alliance, which is active in topics for this group. I kicked this group off working with Alan Bird.

TK: I'm the co-chair with Chris. I'm also with Dolby, Director of Image Technology and Standards, working with Pat on image related tasks, HDR and display technologies and human perception. More recently standards with ICC, CIE, now W3C.

CN: At BBC, advising on new and emerging technologies and leading on media standards on the web. Also co-chair of Media & Entertainment IG and Media WG, supporting media related innovation on the web.

WG: Director Standards at Dolby, standards in the broadcast area, also inside Dolby for more interest in browsers an environment, I spearhead a group looking at that. W3C is at the intersection of that.

SGM: I was CTO of Millicast before joining Dolby 2 years ago. I'm the author of the WHIP spec at IETF, work on WebRTC. I'm involved with WebRTC and WebCodecs groups.

FD: I'm W3C Team, Media & Entertainment champion, making sure we develop the right standards, listening to companies

## Agenda

TK: We'll recap TPAC 2022, talk about the charter, and proposals for topics, TPAC 2023 planning

## Charter

CN: What do we need to do to sign off the charter?

FD: It's informal, no particular requiremnets for CG

TK: AV media is a dominant use case for the web, getting more complex. Goes beyond HDR and multi-channel audio that Dolby work on, can cover any other fields in the group. Formats come with complex metadata, need to find ways to deal with them, so we have implementations on the web that work. These complex formats are challenging to use today, more advanced features might not be supported. Could be due to implementation complexity or limited documentation or lack of identifiers.

Advanced AV formats are widely deployed, outside of the web. HDR and sound formats are available across a range of devices. 58% in 2020 of TVs include HDR and perceptual processing features we're widely using to consume consent today, and increasing.

Satisfying requirements for creators, distributors, consumers is a goal.

Web experiences are not consistently possible yet, we want to find ways to improve within W3C. The web offers opportunities for additional experiences. The CG is for identifying and tapping into those.

Charter scope is to provide a forum to discuss open and commercial media formats used in browsers, TV, and smart TV, how they can be called from web environments and query information from a host system. Interplay and synchronisation between the different formats.

Assessments include developments in adjacent fields, e.g., broadcast, OTT, gaming and film industry. They've been trailblazers in that field. Get input and ideas and references from those fields. Want to identify challenges to influence the web technologies not covered elsewhere in W3C.

What can we deliver? Three different temporal tiers: current challenges, trends, future ideas. Ideally talk about them all. Solve current challenges asap, as the need exists, observe what's coming along, and ideas for future concepts that could become a topic.

Many are discussed in other groups, but here focus on the commercial nature and the interplay with open solutions.

Any observations we want to raise in the relevant issue tracker for those specs, in GitHub. If we find something we'll write a report and hand them to the other W3C group, prepare documents that evaluate the situations and provide suggestions for what could be done.

We won't develop specs in this charter, also not create test suites or other software. We can't produce normative reports as a CG, but we do want reports that suggest requirements for new APIs or future technology landscape reports.

We'll collaborate with the other W3C groups. There may be others beyond audio and video to develop, e.g. the sensor and IoT group, these are becoming more important, to look at from open and commercial point of view. Suggestions for other groups to add, please let us know.

SGM: I'd like to have WebRTC and WebCodecs

PG: As we prepare reports, would we share with all these groups?

TK: Yes, it hopefully would make the work in those down stream groups more effective, don't need to re-discus everything. If there's a topic, we can collate information and links and references on GitHub, to give a better overview of the topic, makes it easier for those groups.

TK: Also external groups for liaisons, we haven't listed yet. One group that would be beneficial is SMPTE, we have good relationship with them. We don't have it set up yet. Another is the ICC. Members of ICC are already active at W3C so shouldn't be a challenge.

There's more detail in the charter text itself. I hope other members that aren't here today can look and review it.

PG: Does anyone see a problem with the charter as proposed? It's good from our point of view. So we'll use it going forward

FD: If the charter is a problem for some companies they won't be able to join, so won't get feedback on it. It looks good to me to go ahead.

TK: How can we set it up to be successful, so it's a win for all participants, provide a space for discussion, hopefully the charter reflects that.

FD: Is that different to what other groups are doing? Browsers typically are open codebases, and commercial issues are discussed in other groups.

TK: One challenge is that participants are concerned about licensing rules, so this gives a starting point to motivate people to participate in other groups later on, particularly companies without exposure in W3C already, from the traditional media world. It's also a starting point towards becoming members. It's kind of a gateway, provide information helpful and useful and also gives members an insight to what's happening, motivate to become members and participate. This is a good starting point, hope to get some good momentum

CN: We've talked about preparing reports that could be relevant for other groups. Speaking as chair of one of these other groups, often they will have their own meetings. I'm wondering whether that will need some active common conversation with stakeholders rather than exchanging reports. If we can encourage people to join meetings here, I think that might help. One of the experiences that we've had in the Media & Entertainment IG is that representatives of browser vendors don't regularly join meetings, but if we advertise discussions on specific topics, they pay attention and will join if it's of interest to them. Two points to this: 1/ we may not expect to have browser participation regularly in this group but 2/ we'll want to make sure that we engage with them as often as possible.

WS: How does that work in other groups. In MEIG, topics get discussed and progressed towards specs, and the spec isn't written in the group, and the members aren't there

FD: Previously, more formal use cases and requirements document, but that happens less and less now. That starts a technical discussion somewhere, then there's a technical proposal developed in another group, and one things lead to another, and things get done. 5 or 10 years ago we had more use cases and requirements documents, but the IG no longer publishes such documents.

PG: Can we do that?

FD: The CG can publish CG reports

CN: Two examples that come to mind: we looked at requirements for timed metadata and published a use cases and requirements document. That was published collaboratively. That led to development of an API proposal in a separate community group. We used TPAC time to raise that with would-be implementers and gather support. In the Interest Group at the moment, we're in a position where it's less clear what the next big thing to produce a document around is going to be. Some exchanges on TV app development with an open question on whether we have the right set of stakeholders around the table to progress this topic. That is a challenge that we have. Building enough momentum around a given topic is hard. The other example was the initiation of the Color on the Web activity. Raised in the IG for a number of years until the CG became active (thanks Pierre-Anthony for driving this!)

SGM: My experience is with technical groups doing the spec, so typically don't gather requirements outside the group, API to solve comes from within the group. Not sure what kind of work we want to do here, explore web technology to align to AV features, have more hands on or deep technical proposals for groups that provide APIs? Explore new APIs to bring media to TVs or whatever, or provide input more specifically on HDR for WebCodecs

TK: I think it's both. We look for topics we want to tackle, could be immediate, look for solution proposals, other things could be less well defined, find resources and web links and actively invite people to present, and write about it to raise awareness. Doing it topic based, we can invite people for projects, we might need feedback from a post house for example, ask them to join to talk about their needs, then experts here can give feedback on requirements for the web. Hope it can be a productive approach

SGM: Collaboration with others depends if it's exploratory, difficult to get people involved. Smaller scope could be easier to get people. With the scope, we can identify some topics, so we have something concrete to discuss.

PG: Part of the reason for us to come, is up to 70% of content on the web is media & entertainment. Companies like Netflix are using W3C technologies to deliver experiences. Question for W3C is, is there a way to make the web even more effective. There seems to be some opportunities to better harmonize commercial solutions with W3C. Things that could be included in W3C standards, what are the recommendations that make the web more friendly to commercial formats. Alan is interested, we want W3C to stay relevant and continue to grow. It is both video and audio, opportunities to make the web more effective, support from commercial interests, and identify those opportunities. Can this group, if we have a recommendation, that would require a technical change, do we have the power to make that happen?

FD: The CG won't have power, WGs have a requirement to take on any feedback it receives

SGM: IPR issue, you can always go to the GitHub pages of the group and make comments, doesn't require you to be a group member. Another way is to find a champion who is inside the WG who can raise it in the WG. But what happens with the IPR, it has to be RANDZ, so not sure how that works with such an intermediary.

FD: You can't expect to have one good idea for it to get adopted, so finding a champion is a good way. Color on the Web is a good example, it was around as a topic before it really got started. And now it's taking shape, but it took time.

CN: Having participants in this group and the relevant WG to champion topics is a good way to go.

## TPAC meeting planning

TK: Need to think about proposals to bring for the TPAC meeting. Should we do in another virtual meeting or at TPAC? Important to have other proposals as well, we want to get ideas in from other members.

PG: The more we can do as a group ahead of TPAC the better. Get agreement on an issue, is there a way to have commercial browsers operate under W3C? Discuss that and why it works, if this group agrees, depending on the topic is where is the best place to take it. We want to do it the right way

CN: If the topic is in scope of an existing working group, I think we can go directly and talk to this group. If it requires a new specification, we'll need to build awareness across groups. For color-related topics, question is whether we can directly talk to the group or need a report proxy.

TK: Don't want to replicate work, but if we can complement the work, that's beneficial. If ColorWeb group has technical foundations, our group can see how the commercial underpinnings can interact with the open solution, so the technical approach can be brought together, it's complementary.

PG: I recommend having another call with more folks, socialise some of the topics. On HDR we have some ideas, also on the audio side. Depending on those, the appropriate group would become evident.

TK: I can run another Doodle poll for 3rd week of August, talk about what to propose

PG: Important to start getting the ideas down

CN: Good suggestion to have a list of topics ready for the TPAC meeting

TK: And actively invite people. We have some good ideas, we've talked with people inside W3C, and in the film industry. Let's get it going, should be beneficial to the web community

[Adjourned]
